ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE

Course Objectives:

The student should be made to:

1. Study the fundamental concepts of AI agents and environments.
2. Learn the methods of problem solving in AI using various search strategies.
3. Understand the concepts of knowledge representation and inference using logic.
4. Understand the concepts of knowledge representation and inference under uncertainty.
5. Learn the introductory concepts of machine learning in AI.

Course Outcomes:

At the end of the course, the student should be able to:

1. Identify, formulate, understand and solve AI problems using search techniques (K3)
2. Elucidate the concept of Knowledge Representation and inference using logics (K2)
3. Elucidate the concept of Knowledge Representation and inference under uncertainty (K2)
4. Elucidate the concept of learning in AI applications (K3)
5. Implement various search, inference and learning algorithms in AI. (K4)

Credits --- 3 0 2 4

UNIT I		Introduction							            8
Introduction to AI-Intelligent Agents – Agents and environments - Good behavior – The nature of environments – 
structure of agents – Agent Components – Agent Architecture – Weak AI – Strong AI – Ethics and Risks of Developing 
Artificial Intelligence

Unit II		PROBLEM SOLVING AND SEARCH TECHNIQUES			          10	
Problem Solving - problem solving agents – example problems – searching for solutions – uninformed search strategies – 
Informed search strategies – heuristic function – local search algorithms and optimization problems - Adversarial Search 
– Games – Optimal decisions in games – Alpha-Beta Pruning - Constraint satisfaction problems (CSP) – Backtracking search 
and Local search for CSP

Unit III	KNOWLEDGE REPRESENTATION AND REASONING			          9
Knowledge-Based Agents – Propositional Logic -First order logic – Syntax and semantics for first order logic – 
Using first order logic – Knowledge engineering in first order logic - Inference in First order logic – 
propositional versus first order logic – unification and lifting – forward chaining – backward chaining – Resolution

Unit IV 	UNCERTAIN KNOWLEDGE AND REASONING			         9
Acting Under Uncertainty – Basic Probability Notation – Inference Using Full Joint Distributions – Independence – 
Bayes’ Rule & its use – Bayesian Networks – Inference in Bayesian Networks – Certainty Factors – Dempster Schafer Theory 
– Fuzzy Reasoning


UNIT V 	LEARNING AND ITS APPLICATIONS					         9
Forms of learning - Supervised learning - Learning decision trees – Unsupervised Learning - K-means  - 
Reinforcement learning – Passive reinforcement learning – Applications in AI

TOTAL : 45
Text Book
1. Stuart Russell, Peter Norvig, “Artificial Intelligence – A Modern Approach”, 3nd Edition, 
Pearson Education / Prentice Hall of India, 2004.

ReferenceS
1. Elaine Rich and Kevin Knight, “Artificial Intelligence”, 2nd Edition, Tata McGraw-Hill, 2003.
2. Andreas Muller and Sarah Guido “Introduction to Machine Learning with Python: A Guide for Data Scientists” 
Shroff/O'Reilly; First edition (2016)
3. David Poole and Alan Mackworth “Artificial Intelligence : Foundation of Computational Agents”, 
Cambridge University Press; Second Edition (2017)



LAB EXERCISES


1. Implementation of Uninformed Search Techniques
2. Implementation of Informed Search Techniques
3. Implementation of Hill Climbing algorithms
4. Implementation of Adversarial Search techniques
5. Implementation of backtracking search for CSP
6. Construction of AND-OR graph from knowledge base
7. Implementation of inference from knowldge base
8. Implementation of inference using full joint probability distribution
9. Implementation of inference using Bayesian network
10. Implementation of Decision tree learning algorithm
11. Implementation of K-means algorithms
12. Implementation of passive reinforcment learning algorithm


	Total Hours : 20
